USHIFT-2089: Add router configuration options (#1548)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/microshift/microshift-router-configuration.md

last-updated: 2024-01-24
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/USHIFT-2089
---

# MicroShift router default configuration options

## Summary
MicroShift's default router is created as part of the platform, but does not
allow configuring any of its specific parameters. For example, you can not
disable the router or change its listening ports.

In order to allow these operations and many more, a set of configuration options
is proposed.

## Motivation
MicroShift's default ingress router comes as part of the product and is always
deployed. As part of the start procedure, MicroShift will configure the router
with fixed parameters, such as being always enabled, and tied to ports 80 and
443. None of these are configurable for the user, and they also tie to how the
router is exposed in the cluster.

In order to allow more flexibility, the following configuration parameters shall
be added:
- Enable/Disable. Some use cases may be egress only, meaning they do not need
  an ingress controller. In this case the router pod should not be scheduled
  to save resources. There should be no rules associated to firewalld or
  iptables either for an improved security posture.

> - Listening ports. Allow configuring ports other than 80 and 443 improves

Reviewer: Since this is not something OpenShift does, we want to go into more detail about why it is necessary for MicroShift. This bullet point could talk about MicroShift not owning the entire host, for example, and so needing to have a way to co-exist with other software that may need to use ports 80 or 443.

  reachable only from certain networks.

### User Stories
As a MicroShift user, I want to enable the default router with a configuration
option.

As a MicroShift user, I want to disable the default router and have all the
manifests automatically removed.

As a MicroShift user, I want to be able to configure the ports on which the
default router is listening.

As a MicroShift user, I want to be able to choose the IPs where the router is
listening.

As a MicroShift user, I want to be able to allow traffic to the router from
specific IP addresses.

### Goals
* Allow users to enable the router.
* Allow users to disable the router.
* Allow users to reach the router in the configured ports.
* Allow users to configure in which IPs the router listens.
* Allow users to allow traffic from specific IP addresses.
* Allow users to deny traffic to the router.

### Non-Goals
* N/A

## Proposal
Each configuration option will get its own section with specifics and
details.
As a common baseline, a new top level section will be added to the
configuration:
```yaml
apiServer:
   ...
# new from here.
ingress:
  status: <Enabled|Disabled> # Defaults to Enabled.
  ports:
    http: <int> # Defaults to 80.

>     https: <int> # Defaults to 443.

Reviewer: Will the user be able to disable individual ports? If they do not want HTTP, for example, could they turn it off or would they use a NetworkPolicy to prevent access?

Reviewer 2: I was going to ask the same question as Doug.  I anticipate some customers will complain that they really cannot even have something _listening_ on port 80 under a strict interpretation of some security policy that prohibits insecure HTTP.    Anyway, it would be helpful at least to mention that disabling ports is a non-goal, and that people should use NetworkPolicy to restrict access to ports instead.

  expose:
    - <IP address/NIC> # Defaults to the NICs of the node

> ```

Reviewer 3: I'd consider this an extension to the MicroShift API since it's user facing. I don't think it's worth duplicating in full under the API Extension section, but it's worth mentioning in short.

### Enable/disable the router
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
ingress:
  status: <Enabled|Disabled> # Defaults to Enabled.
```

With this option MicroShift will decide whether it should create the router
upon starting. This includes not just the pod, but all the associated resources
that come along with it: namespace, services, configmaps, etc.

When setting the option to `Disabled`, the next MicroShift restart should delete
all the router related resources, including APIs and controllers.

Setting the option to `Enabled` will deploy the router, while `Disabled` will disable

> it. Default will be `Enabled`.

Reviewer 3: Why not use a yaml boolean instead? e.g. `DeployDefaultRouter: ([Tt]rue|[Ff]alse)`

Reviewer: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/dev-guide/api-conventions.md#do-not-use-boolean-fields

### Listening ports
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
ingress:
  ports:
    http: <int> # Defaults to 80.
    https: <int> # Defaults to 443.
```

In order to allow this configuration and many other advantages, the

> router service shall be exposed using `LoadBalancer` type. See the

Reviewer: How is the router exposed today?

Author: Done

and pods. Policies can also be configured to allow specific IP addresses and
provide a high degree of customization for network traffic. They use the CNI
instead of host level settings, providing greater flexibility and being self
contained within MicroShift.

Users in need of blocking traffic shall use the `NetworkPolicy` resource. A
section in the documentation will be added to describe how to do this.

### Configure IPs where the router listens
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
ingress:
  expose:
    - <IP address/NIC> # Defaults to the NICs of the node
```

As we have seen in previous sections, the use of `LoadBalancer` makes ovnk
configure iptables rules to expose the service outside of the cluster.
Building on [LoadBalancer controller enhancement](loadbalancer-service-support.md),
the service is exposed using the node IP and configured ports.

All the IPs where the router is exposed need to be part of the `LoadBalancer`
service status definition. In order to provide more flexibility, the
configuration options are able to take IP addresses and/or NIC names in the
system. Using NIC names abstracts away IP changes, in cases where this

> happens.

Reviewer: Does having the router listen on multiple IPs have any effect on the certificates needed?

Reviewer 2: The question about certificates is interesting in light of the `expose.hostnames` option that this EP adds.  With this new option, you can specify a host name that is entirely different from the cluster's base domain.  Is the ingress domain also configurable in MicroShift?  Is having all these different places you can configure a domain name or host name (or *must* configure them in order to keep the configuration consistent) going to be confusing or troublesome?

As a default value, MicroShift will take the NIC names for each of the default

> routes found in the system.

Reviewer: The current default behavior is to expose only the node's IP. While the default you propose here might have been good if we had designed the router integration this way to start, we should consider whether changing that default could open up any issues. For example, the router might accept traffic that would otherwise have been not accepted. Users upgrading existing systems may be surprised by that.

Author: Right now its crio opening the ports and listening in every interface:
```
$ netstat -ptanu | grep 80
(Not all processes could be identified, non-owned process info
 will not be shown, you would have to be root to see it all.)
tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:80              0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN      -
$ netstat -ptanu | grep 443
(Not all processes could be identified, non-owned process info
 will not be shown, you would have to be root to see it all.)
tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:443             0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN      -
```
This is a safer/more restricted approach as you rely only on iptables rules matching specific destinations. The defaults account for any external sources to be able to hit the router, though.

Reviewer: When you say "right now" do you mean in the code we're shipping or in the implementation you're doing for this enhancement in parallel?

Author: This is shipped code since 4.13, it has not changed its behavior.

Reviewer: Huh, that's not what I expected. Every interface is still not the same as all of the default routes, as you describe.

How do we get the equivalent behavior with the new configuration?

Author: Changed this to match current behavior.

> ### Allow specific IP addresses

Reviewer: We talked about removing the discussions of using NetworkPolicy, since that is an existing API and doesn't represent a design change in the system. We will document how to use them elsewhere. You could _mention_ that they will be used to deal with the firewall-like behaviors, but we don't need a lot of detail about it.

Author: So the example can also be removed? I tried to capture that in the first 2 paragraphs and then provide an example for guidance/clarity.

Author: Done

This may be seen as a special case of firewalling, but using IP addresses
instead of ports. Using the same `NetworkPolicy` resources, IPs may be
specified to allow traffic from them and reject it from any other source.

Please note this is a manual procedure for the user. Documentation will be
added on how to perform the required actions.

For example, the following policy allows traffic only from CIDR
`192.168.122.0/24` to port 443 (even internal traffic would be rejected):
```yaml
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: NetworkPolicy
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2023-10-31T13:17:42Z"
  generation: 2
  name: block-router
  namespace: openshift-ingress
  resourceVersion: "5350"

>   uid: e00f5ec7-1557-4285-aa1c-b1b909e53b7a

Reviewer 3: Just a nit, but you could drop the cluster-managed fields since they aren't meant to be user facing.  That would just leave `name` and `namespace`, i.e. the user facing fields.

provide a high degree of customization for network traffic. They use the CNI
instead of host level settings, providing greater flexibility and being self
contained within MicroShift.

Users in need of blocking traffic shall use the `NetworkPolicy` resource. A
section in the documentation will be added to describe how to do this.

### Configure IPs where the router listens
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
ingress:
  expose:
    - <IP address/hostname> # Defaults to the node's hostname.
```

As we have seen in previous sections, the use of `LoadBalancer` makes ovnk
configure iptables rules to expose the service outside of the cluster.
Building on [LoadBalancer controller enhancement](loadbalancer-service-support.md),
the service is exposed using the node IP and configured ports.

All the IPs where the router is exposed need to be part of the `LoadBalancer`
service status definition. In order to provide more flexibility, the
configuration options are able to take IP addresses and/or hostnames.

MicroShift will use the hostname as a default value for this. The router will
only listen on the primary IP for the host unless configured to do otherwise.

> This is a sensible default that covers basic networking setups. Any advanced

Reviewer: The new default behavior MUST maintain backwards compatibility. The default needs to be the nodeIP, not the "hostname", which may not be on the IP with the default route.

Reviewer 4: +1 on Dougs comment. From my point of view, we need a way to express "listen on all available IPs" and make that default. The new implementation should default to the same behavior we had in the old, i.e. listen on all available IPs (without a need to specify them). could be e.g. "expose: *", or "expose: all", or make expose optional and if not present, it means "listen on all available IPs".

Author: Changed it so it listens on any IP, even the internal ones. The only one that does not work is the link local address, which is internal to ovnk and should not be used anywhere else. The current implementation listens there by mistake.

configuration, such as multiple interfaces, VLANs, etc. will need user's
configuration.
The hostnames will be turned into the IP addresses automatically by
MicroShift, which will also watch for IP changes by doing periodic queries to

> the DNS.

Reviewer: I'm still not clear about why we would want to take hostnames. It sounds like it is going to be more work to implement and require yet another periodic task to consume CPU. What does using hostnames give us that using IPs alone does not?

Author: For example, relying on DNS or DHCP for the host. I am thinking of cases where you would have another NIC (not the primary one) where you would rely on DNS from external sources and changing its IP would not trigger a MicroShift restart.

configured in MicroShift, this resource will need further customization done
by MicroShift's start process.

The rest of the changes imply only additions. The LoadBalancer controller needs
an expansion on its capabilities to include more IPs in the status and log any
changes to services. All the logic to control NetworkPolicy resources is also
new.

#### How config options change manifests
Each of the configuration options described above has a direct effect on the
manifests that MicroShift will apply after starting.

The `router.status` option will drive whether the router `Deployment` and the
`Service` get created.
```yaml
ingress:
  status: <Enabled|Disabled> # Defaults to Enabled.
```

The `router.policy.ports.http` and `router.policy.ports.https` will determine,
within the `Deployment` and the `Service`, which ports get configured to be
exposed.
```yaml
ingress:
  ports:
    http: <int> # Defaults to 80.
    https: <int> # Defaults to 443.
```

The `router.policy.expose` option, which is a list, will configure the
`status.loadBalancer` field in the `Service`. Ovnk will pick up this field to
configure the iptables rules.
```yaml
ingress:
  expose:

>     - <IP address/hostname> # Defaults to the node's exposed IP addresses.

Author: Somehow ovnk does not create iptables rules if its not an IP address, so the controller will need to take care of turning hostnames into addresses (also poll DNS from time to time to see if the IP changed).
If we decide against doing that translation then we need to take care of iptables rules in the controller, instead of ovnk. This would make the feature independent from ovnk.
A user would express that by adding all the externally available IPs/hostnames in the config file. This is also the default behavior.

```

### Risks and Mitigations
Some of the features in this enhancement proposal rely on the
[LoadBalancer controller](loadbalancer-service-support.md).
Some of the features rely on NetworkPolicy resources, so the CNI needs
to support that.

### Drawbacks
Some of the features depend on a non-agnostic CNI design, which is the
`LoadBalancer` controller. A different behavior should be expected if using a
different CNI.

## Design Details

> #### Why LoadBalancer service

Reviewer: I think lines 280-319 are saying

We used host ports on the router originally because that allowed clients from anywhere to communicate with the router before OVN-K had a way to expose something as a load balancer service. Using host ports meant CRI set up access to the ports, using iptables rules that bypass firewalld and cannot be controlled with the NetworkPolicy API, so it is not currently possible to control access to the router at all. As part of this enhancement, we will change the service type from host port to load balancer. That will let us easily configure the ports used by the router by setting the ports on the service, and let a user apply NetworkPolicy to control access to the router.

Is that right?

Author: Yes.
Back when host ports were introduced there was no support for load balancer services and host network was not good enough, so this was the only way out. Even if host network would have sufficed, it is subject to the same limitations than host ports.
The rest of what you said is 100% correct.

Reviewer: Maybe you can tighten up this section, since it's mostly history.

Author: Done

#### Allowing specific IP addresses
Allowing specific IP addresses is achieved through the use of `NetworkPolicy`
resources, as seen in previous examples. These policies include the allowed IP
addresses and ports in the spec, meaning they reject everything else that is
not included explicitly.

Due to MicroShift's networking setup, there is one more change required for
the `NetworkPolicy` to filter out based on the source IP.

As it can be seen in the iptables rules, traffic towards the router ports is
subject to DNAT to the router service IP and port. All services use
`externalTrafficPolicy: Cluster`, which will SNAT traffic's source IP to match
that of the node. This gets further NAT, as described here. By the time the
`NetworkPolicy` is evaluated the source IP has been replaced with
`100.64.0.0/16`, which will not produce matches against the configured IP in
the policy, and traffic will get rejected.

To overcome this, all LoadBalancer services in MicroShift that are subject to
get NetworkPolicy resources to control external traffic must set
`externalTrafficPolicy: Local`. This setting will not SNAT packets and the

> source IP is preserved until NetworkPolicy checks run.

Reviewer: How will we ensure that all the right services are configured this way? Does it only apply to the router service, or will we need to make additional changes?

Author: This only applies to LoadBalancer services that need to perform ingress traffic control using NetworkPolicy. I think documenting it should be enough?

Reviewer: Will this be different from host a similar LoadBalancer service on OpenShift would need to be configured?

Author: I would say it shouldnt. Configuring a LB service means there is an external LB that will later on do the balancing towards different nodes. There is no need to perform further balancing within the cluster. OCP does have a LB before the nodes, and microshift does not need one, so the situation is equivalent.

and pods. Policies can also be configured to allow specific IP addresses and
provide a high degree of customization for network traffic. They use the CNI
instead of host level settings, providing greater flexibility and being self
contained within MicroShift.

Users in need of blocking traffic shall use the `NetworkPolicy` resource. A
section in the documentation will be added to describe how to do this.

### Configure IPs where the router listens
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
ingress:
  expose: # Defaults to IPs in the host. Details below.
    hostnames:
    - <hostname>
    interfaces:
    - <NIC name>
    ipAddresses:
    - <IP address>
```
As we have seen in previous sections, the use of `LoadBalancer` makes ovnk
configure iptables rules to expose the service outside of the cluster.
Building on [LoadBalancer controller enhancement](loadbalancer-service-support.md),
the service is exposed using the node IP and configured ports.

All the IPs where the router is exposed need to be part of the `LoadBalancer`
service status definition. In order to provide more flexibility, the
configuration options are able to take IP addresses, hostnames and/or NIC
names.

> MicroShift will default to listen to external IPs, the service IP and the

Reviewer 5: What will happen when `expose` is configured? Will it override the default behavior (all IPs: ext, svc, and kas) completely or it will be an addition to the defaults?

Author: yes, it overrides all the defaults and only listens where it was configured to do so. Added a clarification for that.

MicroShift, same as the NIC names.

### Allow specific IP addresses
This may be seen as a special case of firewalling, but using IP addresses
instead of ports. Using the same `NetworkPolicy` resources, IPs may be
specified to allow traffic from them and reject it from any other source.

Please note this is a manual procedure for the user. Documentation will be
added on how to perform the required actions.

More information in the design details section.

### Workflow Description
**cluster admin** is a human user responsible for configuring a MicroShift
cluster.

1. The cluster admin adds specific configuration for the router prior to
   MicroShift's start.
2. After MicroShift started, the system will ingest the configuration and setup
   everything according to it.
3. The router will enabled/disabled, be exposed on the specified ports, on the
   specified IPs, allowing only specified IP addresses, all according to the
   cluster admin provided configuration. This includes the status in the
   LoadBalancer service type for the router.

### API Extensions
As described in the proposal, there is an entire new section in the configuration:
```yaml

> ingress:

Reviewer 5: I'm wondering if it would be possible to also present the `Service` that will be created out of `ingress`?

Reviewer 5: It's what caused this request - it would be nice to have some visual mapping unless it's little value due to dynamic hostname->IP conversions

Enhancement is solely intended for MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints
The default router is composed of a bunch of assets part of the MicroShift
binary. These assets come from the rebase, copied from the original router in
[cluster-ingress-operator](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator).
There is already a [LoadBalancer service](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/master/pkg/manifests/assets/router/service-cloud.yaml)
included, which MicroShift does not copy yet. Depending on the options
configured in MicroShift, this resource will need further customization done
by MicroShift's start process.

The rest of the changes imply only additions. The LoadBalancer controller needs
an expansion on its capabilities to include more IPs in the status and log any
changes to services. All the logic to control NetworkPolicy resources is also
new.

#### How config options change manifests
Each of the configuration options described above has a direct effect on the
manifests that MicroShift will apply after starting.

The `ingress.status` option will drive whether the router `Deployment` and the
`Service` get created.
```yaml
ingress:

>   status: <Enabled|Disabled> # Defaults to Enabled.

Reviewer 3: Assuming I start MicroShift with the ingress enabled: what happens to the API objects if I then edit the config to disable ingress and restart MicroShift?  Will MicroShift remove the orphaned API objects at startup?

Author: Only the router pod and its manifests are removed. The routes resource remains, and any user created manifests will also stay there too.
A user may well have a router different than the default one and the rest of the features need to work too. And this would not require any restarts so it needs to be there (meaning the api, controller, etc) everytime MicroShift is running.

```

The `ingress.policy.ports.http` and `ingress.policy.ports.https` will determine,
within the `Deployment` and the `Service`, which ports get configured to be
exposed.
```yaml
ingress:
  ports:
    http: <int> # Defaults to 80.
    https: <int> # Defaults to 443.
```

> The `ingress.policy.expose` option contains lists of hostnames, NIC names and

Reviewer 3: What should happen if an IP address is resolved multiple times, i.e. the user set the hostname and ipAddr? Is that an error? Should MicroShift dedupe IPs before applying them? Or should it simply passthrough the duped values to the Service?

Author: ovnk will take care of creating only the rules that are needed, no duplicates. In my current implementation I am removing any duplicates too, so its a double safety net. Might be worth mentioning here, will add it.

  a restart of the pod.

##### Using LoadBalancer service type
Common ways of exposing services outside of the cluster are using services of
types NodePort or LoadBalancer. In MicroShift, ports from the service are
picked up from ovnk (the CNI) and turned into iptables rules to forward them
to the service IP. In this case, default router should be exposed using a
LoadBalancer service type.

 When using this kind of service ovnk will configure special iptables rules
 that will forward traffic to the service IP instead. These rules are also
 configured to use the node IP as destination address, as per
 [LoadBalancer support](loadbalancer-service-support.md) feature.

#### Firewalling ports
Using LoadBalancer service will create special iptables rules with more
precedence than those from firewalld. This means a `LoadBalancer` service is
immune to such configurations. In order to firewall ports the user needs to
take action by either creating `NetworkPolicy` resources or disabling the
router.

Disabling the router might be disruptive, as not all traffic may come from
external sources. This procedure also requires a restart, which might not be

> desirable/possible in all situations.

Reviewer 3: This would be worth calling out in Risks/Mitigations, since it's risk this EP introduces.

Author: Done

  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/deployment-ingresscontroller: default
  policyTypes:
  - Ingress
```
Assuming the pod network is configured to use CIDR `10.42.0.0/16`, the above
policy will block all traffic not coming from that network.

Any of these methods is equivalent to using firewalld to block traffic, but
using the CNI instead of a host level setting. This provides greater
flexibility, as it is self contained within MicroShift APIs.

If a user needs to block traffic to a port this needs a `NetworkPolicy`
resource like the one shown above. This is NOT automatically done by
MicroShift, user action is required.

#### Exposing the router
Relying on [LoadBalancer controller enhancement](loadbalancer-service-support.md)
means the services are updated by this component. However, ovnk only turns IP
addresses into iptables rules, it does not take Hostname, which is another
valid field for the service status.

Since the configuration uses NIC names and also host names, the controller
needs to translate these to their corresponding IP addresses, and then
configure them in the service. To keep up with the dynamic nature of IP

> addresses and names, it needs to perform periodic checks and updates.

Reviewer 3: Should the check/update period be configurable?

Author: If its based on DNS lookup we could leverage on the TTL too. If it is based on files (like /etc/hosts) then you need to query again, which is where this parameter would come in handy. WDYT @DanielFroehlich @dhellmann?

specific IP addresses.

### Goals
* Allow users to enable the router.
* Allow users to disable the router.
* Allow users to reach the router in the configured ports.
* Allow users to configure in which IPs the router listens.
* Allow users to allow traffic from specific IP addresses.
* Allow users to deny traffic to the router.

### Non-Goals
* N/A

## Proposal
Each configuration option will get its own section with specifics and
details.
As a common baseline, a new top level section will be added to the
configuration:
```yaml
apiServer:
   ...
# new from here.
ingress:
  status: <Enabled|Disabled> # Defaults to Enabled.
  ports:
    http: <int> # Defaults to 80.
    https: <int> # Defaults to 443.
  expose: # Defaults to IPs in the host. Details below.
    hostnames:
    - <hostname>
    interfaces:
    - <NIC name>
    ipAddresses:
    - <IP address>
```

### Enable/disable the router
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
ingress:
  status: <Enabled|Disabled> # Defaults to Enabled.
```

With this option MicroShift will decide whether it should create the router
upon starting. This includes not just the pod, but all the associated resources

> that come along with it: namespace, services, configmaps, etc.

Author: 1. MicroShift does not use the operator as a whole, it only takes the deployment for the default router. Therefore, it does not have the `IngressController` CRD.
2. This one is present in MicroShift. You could have use cases like having a different router configured, different than the default one.

> that come along with it: namespace, services, configmaps, etc.

Reviewer 6: > This one is present in MicroShift. You could have use cases like having a different router configured, different than the default one.

I'm not aware of any ingresscontroller which implements the Route API except the OpenShift router. So, disabling the router would mean that all the routes would be left unadmitted (unserved). That may be worth mentioning in the EP.

When setting the option to `Disabled`, the next MicroShift restart should delete

> all the router related resources, including APIs and controllers.

Author: MicroShift knows which manifests it creates for each component in the cluster. For example, the router is created here: https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/pkg/components/controllers.go#L105. So it goes through those files to delete them too.
That annotation will be much more convenient though, thanks!

Setting the option to `Enabled` will deploy the router, while `Disabled` will disable
it. Default will be `Enabled`.

### Listening ports
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
ingress:
  ports:
    http: <int> # Defaults to 80.
    https: <int> # Defaults to 443.
```

MicroShift does not own the host, which means there might be other
applications running alongside and some ports may already be opened.
MicroShift must be able to accommodate such situations and be ready to listen
in other ports, hence the configuration options.

In order to allow this configuration and many other advantages, the
router service shall be changed so that it is exposed using `LoadBalancer`
type instead of using host ports. See the Design Details section for more

> information.

Author: Done.

#### Firewalling ports
Using `LoadBalancer` service type prevents the usage of firewalld to block
access to ports. Since this is a feature that users may require for auditing,
an alternative is provided.

The `NetworkPolicy` resource fits the needs for blocking traffic to services
and pods. Policies can also be configured to allow specific IP addresses and
provide a high degree of customization for network traffic. They use the CNI
instead of host level settings, providing greater flexibility and being self
contained within MicroShift.

Users in need of blocking traffic shall use the `NetworkPolicy` resource. A
section in the documentation will be added to describe how to do this.

### Configure IPs where the router listens
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
ingress:
  expose: # Defaults to IPs in the host. Details below.
    hostnames:
    - <hostname>
    interfaces:
    - <NIC name>
    ipAddresses:
    - <IP address>
```
As we have seen in previous sections, the use of `LoadBalancer` makes ovnk

> configure iptables rules to expose the service outside of the cluster.

Author: You are right, this was in previous sections before but it got reshuffled. Added a link to where it is now. Thanks.

included, which MicroShift does not copy yet. Depending on the options
configured in MicroShift, this resource will need further customization done
by MicroShift's start process.

The rest of the changes imply only additions. The LoadBalancer controller needs
an expansion on its capabilities to include more IPs in the status and log any
changes to services. All the logic to control NetworkPolicy resources is also
new.

#### How config options change manifests
Each of the configuration options described above has a direct effect on the
manifests that MicroShift will apply after starting.

The `ingress.status` option will drive whether the router `Deployment` and the
`Service` get created.
```yaml
ingress:
  status: <Enabled|Disabled> # Defaults to Enabled.
```

The `ingress.policy.ports.http` and `ingress.policy.ports.https` will determine,
within the `Deployment` and the `Service`, which ports get configured to be
exposed.
```yaml
ingress:
  ports:
    http: <int> # Defaults to 80.
    https: <int> # Defaults to 443.
```

The `ingress.policy.expose` option contains lists of hostnames, NIC names and
IP addresses. MicroShift will translate them to IP addresses and then update

> the `status.loadBalancer` field in the `Service`. Ovnk will pick up this field

Reviewer 6: > MicroShift will translate them to IP addresses and then update the `status.loadBalancer` field in the `Service`.

You mean the new service controller of MicroShift?

Author: This is victim to the same reshuffle I commented above, added a reference. This controller already existed as part of a different feature.

to configure the iptables rules.
```yaml
ingress:
  expose: # Defaults to IPs in the host. Details below.
    hostnames:
    - <hostname>
    interfaces:
    - <NIC name>
    ipAddresses:
    - <IP address>
```

### Risks and Mitigations
Some of the features in this enhancement proposal rely on the
[LoadBalancer controller](loadbalancer-service-support.md).
Some of the features rely on NetworkPolicy resources, so the CNI needs

> to support that.

Reviewer 6: Why relying on the new service controller and `NetworkPolicy` is a risk?

Author: The service controller already exists, and it is tied to ovnk as it relies on automatically picking up the IPs from the service status field to configure the iptables rules. Without this the LoadBalancer service does not work, and with that the NetworkPolicies.

Reviewer 6: After a Slack discussion: 1) the ingress IP provisioning is custom and implemented by the referenced controller, 2) `NetworkPolicy` is not implemented in any CNI which tightly couples the implementation to the OVN-K.

Disabling the router requires a MicroShift restart with all the associated
consequences (apiserver downtime, etc.).

### Drawbacks

> Some of the features depend on a non-agnostic CNI design, which is the

Reviewer 6: To clarify things a little: can you name the features?

Author: Done.

The following limitations apply to the current setup:
* Iptables rules bypass firewalld settings. This means any firewall
  configuration applying to host ports will be ignored. It is not possible
  to control incoming traffic to these ports.
* NetworkPolicy resources do not apply to host ports. These resources are
  able to control how traffic reaches which endpoints, including external
  sources.
* Any pod using this option is unable to scale within the same node.
* Port numbers are bound to the deployment, therefore any changes require
  a restart of the pod.

##### Using LoadBalancer service type
Common ways of exposing services outside of the cluster are using services of
types NodePort or LoadBalancer. In MicroShift, ports from the service are
picked up from ovnk (the CNI) and turned into iptables rules to forward them
to the service IP. In this case, default router should be exposed using a
LoadBalancer service type.

 When using this kind of service ovnk will configure special iptables rules
 that will forward traffic to the service IP instead. These rules are also
 configured to use the node IP as destination address, as per

>  [LoadBalancer support](loadbalancer-service-support.md) feature.

Author: There are two services after this enhancement, the `LoadBalancer` and the `ClusterIP`. The `ClusterIP` [already exists](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/assets/components/openshift-router/service-internal.yaml) and this is not modified. The enhancement is all about exposing the router outside of the cluster, but the internal traffic remains unchanged.
What ovnk does is to configure new iptables rules forwarding external traffic targeting a specific IP and port to the `LoadBalancer` service IP, using the same port. This gets into regular k8s networking then.
I added a non-goal to clarify the internal traffic remains unchanged.

>  [LoadBalancer support](loadbalancer-service-support.md) feature.

Reviewer 6: I agree that the internal service is worth mentioning too.

What I was trying to understand is what "the service IP" was. 

>  When using this kind of service ovnk will configure special iptables rules that will forward traffic to the service IP instead

I suppose it refers to the IP from the service' status. Ultimately, it will be the IP address specified in the MicroShift configuration (`ingress.expose`).

>  [LoadBalancer support](loadbalancer-service-support.md) feature.

Author: Clarified the service IP and added a goal about not changing internal access to the router.

>  [LoadBalancer support](loadbalancer-service-support.md) feature.

Reviewer 6: > When using this kind of service ovnk will configure special iptables rules that will forward traffic to the LoadBalancer service network IP. These rules are also configured to use the node IP as destination address, as per [LoadBalancer support](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/a82f70e86424825bd39e6a531816f0ba2edaa9b2/enhancements/microshift/loadbalancer-service-support.md) feature.

I'm still a little confused. Will NodeIP be present in the service's status (`.status.loadBalanacer`)? According to [OVN Kubernetes chapter](https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/a82f70e86424825bd39e6a531816f0ba2edaa9b2/enhancements/microshift/loadbalancer-service-support.md#ovn-kubernetes) the destination will be inside the overlay network (service's clusterIP).

>  [LoadBalancer support](loadbalancer-service-support.md) feature.

Author: let me show through an example
```

>  [LoadBalancer support](loadbalancer-service-support.md) feature.

Reviewer: I know  we talked about taking out a lot of the very detailed examples you had in an early draft, but if 1-2 examples help clarify things you could add them.

>  [LoadBalancer support](loadbalancer-service-support.md) feature.

Author: Updated the section to clarify how it works and also add a short example.

>  [LoadBalancer support](loadbalancer-service-support.md) feature.

Reviewer 6: Thanks! The phrasing alone looks clear enough to me now. I don't insist on the example with `oc` and `iptables` commands.

#### Firewalling ports
Using LoadBalancer service will create special iptables rules with more
precedence than those from firewalld. This means a `LoadBalancer` service is
immune to such configurations. In order to firewall ports the user needs to
take action by either creating `NetworkPolicy` resources or disabling the
router.

> TODO esto se va a los risks.

Author: Oops, my bad, sorry.

`externalTrafficPolicy: Cluster`, which will SNAT traffic's source IP to match
that of the node. This gets further NAT, as described here. By the time the
`NetworkPolicy` is evaluated the source IP has been replaced with
`100.64.0.0/16`, which will not produce matches against the configured IP in
the policy, and traffic will get rejected.

To overcome this, all LoadBalancer services in MicroShift that are subject to
get NetworkPolicy resources to control external traffic must set
`externalTrafficPolicy: Local`. This setting will not SNAT packets and the
source IP is preserved until NetworkPolicy checks run.

This setting, however, comes at the expense of an even load when having more
than one node, as traffic will not be sent to another node on the same port.
This is not an issue in single node, which is MicroShift's use case and design
principle.

This setting is also the default in OCP when deploying in cloud, having a load
balancer before the cluster. Manifests for both OCP and MicroShift are
compatible in this regard.

## Open Questions
N/A

## Test Plan
All of the changes listed here will be included in the current e2e scenario

> testing harness in MicroShift.

Reviewer: We should add a test to ensure we're solving the issue described in https://redhat-internal.slack.com/archives/C03DP9PABNC/p1708586503890529 where a service on the cluster is overriding the iptable rule for the router.

  an ingress controller. In this case the router pod should not be scheduled
  to save resources. There should be no rules associated to firewalld or
  iptables either for an improved security posture.
- Listening ports. Allow configuring ports other than 80 and 443 improves
  flexibility.
- Which IPs the router listens on. Some use cases may require the router to be
  reachable only from certain networks.

### User Stories
As a MicroShift user, I want to enable the default router with a configuration
option.

As a MicroShift user, I want to disable the default router and have all the
manifests automatically removed.

As a MicroShift user, I want to be able to configure the ports on which the
default router is listening.

As a MicroShift user, I want to be able to choose the IPs where the router is
listening.

As a MicroShift user, I want to be able to allow traffic to the router from
specific IP addresses.

### Goals
* Allow users to enable the router.
* Allow users to disable the router.
* Allow users to reach the router in the configured ports.
* Allow users to configure in which IPs the router listens.
* Allow users to allow traffic from specific IP addresses.

> * Allow users to deny traffic to the router.

Reviewer: There's been interest in having a way to disable ingress and the router for OCP already. I don't know about the port configuration, but that feels less necessary in an environment where the cluster software owns the whole host and doesn't have to share host port with other arbitrary applications.

* Internal access from applications to the router must remain unchanged.

### Non-Goals
N/A

## Proposal
Each configuration option will get its own section with specifics and
details.
As a common baseline, a new top level section will be added to the
configuration:
```yaml
apiServer:
   ...
# new from here.
ingress:
  status: <Enabled|Disabled> # Defaults to Enabled.
  ports:
    http: <int> # Defaults to 80.
    https: <int> # Defaults to 443.
  expose: # Defaults to IPs in the host. Details below.
    hostnames:
    - <hostname>
    interfaces:
    - <NIC name>
    ipAddresses:
    - <IP address>
```

### Enable/disable the router
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
ingress:

>   status: <Enabled|Disabled> # Defaults to Enabled.

Reviewer: We could still align with the terminology and use the management states that make sense. The router is "managed" by MicroShift, even though it's managed differently. And "removed" is more descriptive than "disabled", as Miciah points out.

```

With this option MicroShift will decide whether it should create the router
upon starting. This includes not just the pod, but all the associated resources
that come along with it: namespace, services, configmaps, etc.

When setting the option to `Disabled`, the next MicroShift restart will
delete all the default router related resources.

Note that any existing routes will stop being served and it will require an

> application deploying an OpenShift router instance.

Reviewer 2: Hm, this is confusing.  Are you saying that if you disable the default router but still want to use routes, then you (most likely meaning the cluster admin) need to deploy a custom router instance?  I think the phrasing "it will require an application deploying an OpenShift router instance" is throwing me; it suggests to me that the application itself is taking the action of deploying the router.

Reviewer: We would be more likely to encourage someone to deploy a different ingress controller, right? The router stuff is an implementation detail of our ingress, even though it's technically exposed in its own right.

But let's not get hung up on that. If the user disables the router, they won't have either ingress or the router. If that's the intent they express, we can assume they have a reason for it, like their workload not needing it.

In order to allow this configuration and many other advantages, the
router service shall be changed so that it is exposed using `LoadBalancer`
type instead of using host ports. See the [Design Details section](#why-loadbalancer-service)
for more information.

#### Firewalling ports
Using `LoadBalancer` service type prevents the usage of firewalld to block
access to ports. Since this is a feature that users may require for auditing,
an alternative is provided.

The `NetworkPolicy` resource fits the needs for blocking traffic to services
and pods. Policies can also be configured to allow specific IP addresses and
provide a high degree of customization for network traffic. They use the CNI
instead of host level settings, providing greater flexibility and being self
contained within MicroShift.

Users in need of blocking traffic shall use the `NetworkPolicy` resource. A
section in the documentation will be added to describe how to do this.

### Configure IPs where the router listens
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
ingress:
  expose: # Defaults to IPs in the host. Details below.
    hostnames:
    - <hostname>
    interfaces:
    - <NIC name>
    ipAddresses:

>     - <IP address>

Reviewer: Do we need all 3 of these options in the first iteration of this work? Can we simplify by picking 1 that lets us be more expressive than we are now, without having to do them all at one time?

>     - <IP address>

Reviewer 2: > By reviewers you mean the api team in OCP?

Yes, in particular David Eads and Joel Speed.  I don't know whether they generally review MicroShift-specific APIs, but they might have some helpful suggestions.

  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/deployment-ingresscontroller: default
  policyTypes:
  - Ingress
```
Assuming the pod network is configured to use CIDR `10.42.0.0/16`, the above
policy will block all traffic not coming from that network.

Any of these methods is equivalent to using firewalld to block traffic, but
using the CNI instead of a host level setting. This provides greater
flexibility, as it is self contained within MicroShift APIs.

If a user needs to block traffic to a port this needs a `NetworkPolicy`
resource like the one shown above. This is NOT automatically done by
MicroShift, user action is required.

#### Exposing the router
Relying on [LoadBalancer controller enhancement](loadbalancer-service-support.md)
means the services are updated by this component. However, ovnk only turns IP
addresses into iptables rules, it does not take Hostname, which is another
valid field for the service status.

Since the configuration uses NIC names and also host names, the controller
needs to translate these to their corresponding IP addresses, and then
configure them in the service. To keep up with the dynamic nature of IP

> addresses and names, it needs to perform periodic checks and updates.

Reviewer 2: Does this name resolution have well defined semantics?  

* Where is the resolution done?  For example, is it done on my machine from which I install MicroShift, or from within MicroShift?
* Which name server is used?  For example, does it use the cluster DNS service, or whatever is in the MicroShift node host's `/etc/resolv.conf`, or something else?  Could I use a host name that I specified in `/etc/hosts`?  
* How often is name resolution done?
* If I specify a host name that can resolve when I install MicroShift but then the host name cannot be resolved after installation (maybe because the record was deleted, or maybe because DNS is down), what happens?

Reviewer 2: Oh, one more question:  Are IPv6 addresses included in the name resolution and service status?

Author: We dropped the DNS resolution so this now only applies to NICs. We do not have IPv6 support yet, as that is a feature for a future version.

This setting, however, comes at the expense of an even load when having more
than one node, as traffic will not be sent to another node on the same port.
This is not an issue in single node, which is MicroShift's use case and design
principle.

This setting is also the default in OCP when deploying in cloud, having a load
balancer before the cluster. Manifests for both OCP and MicroShift are
compatible in this regard.

## Open Questions
N/A

## Test Plan
All of the changes listed here will be included in the current e2e scenario
testing harness in MicroShift.

## Graduation Criteria
Targeting GA for MicroShift 4.16 release.

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
- Ability to utilize the enhancement end to end
- End user documentation, relative API stability
- Sufficient test coverage

### Tech Preview -> GA
- More testing (upgrade, downgrade)
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default
- User facing documentation created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

### Removing a deprecated feature
N/A

## Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy
In the previous implementation, using host ports, the router would listen on

> any interface (except loopback). This included some of the internal IP

Reviewer 2: Are you sure that MicroShift's router deployment doesn't listen on loopback?  OpenShift's router does, and I'm not sure how you could even configure that without using a custom HAProxy configuration template, which I didn't think MicroShift was doing.

Reviewer 2: If the node host has an eth0 device and an lo device and the router pod uses host networking, I thought the container would share the node host's eth0 and lo.  Does the container in fact get its own lo while sharing the node host's eth0?  

Well, if the statement in the EP is correct, then we don't need to continue this thread (unless you want to); I can go off and investigate how this works for my own edification.

Reviewer 2: I'm still confused as to why the router isn't listening on loopback.  The router binds to all interfaces.  Does the router container not have an lo interface in its network namespace?

Author: Will post some examples. All of the info below is from the microshift host itself.
The `hostPort` entries in the router deployment generate this in the host:
```bash
# iptables -t nat -L
...
Chain OUTPUT (policy ACCEPT)
target     prot opt source               destination         
OVN-KUBE-EXTERNALIP  all  --  anywhere             anywhere            
OVN-KUBE-NODEPORT  all  --  anywhere             anywhere            
OVN-KUBE-ITP  all  --  anywhere             anywhere            
KUBE-HOSTPORTS  all  --  anywhere             anywhere             /* kube hostport portals */ ADDRTYPE match dst-type LOCAL
...
Chain KUBE-HOSTPORTS (2 references)
target     prot opt source               destination         
KUBE-HP-M3VSDVN3JKLTMBIB  tcp  --  anywhere             anywhere             /* k8s_router-default-68d4dc8676-n2fz8_openshift-ingress_72872086-65d9-47e6-a787-7b86ecf0d920_0_ hostport 443 */ tcp dpt:https
KUBE-HP-VG7GIYRPKPR5JDKH  tcp  --  anywhere             anywhere             /* k8s_router-default-68d4dc8676-n2fz8_openshift-ingress_72872086-65d9-47e6-a787-7b86ecf0d920_0_ hostport 80 */ tcp dpt:http

Chain KUBE-HP-M3VSDVN3JKLTMBIB (1 references)
target     prot opt source               destination         
KUBE-MARK-MASQ  all  --  10.42.0.7            anywhere             /* k8s_router-default-68d4dc8676-n2fz8_openshift-ingress_72872086-65d9-47e6-a787-7b86ecf0d920_0_ hostport 443 */
DNAT       tcp  --  anywhere             anywhere             /* k8s_router-default-68d4dc8676-n2fz8_openshift-ingress_72872086-65d9-47e6-a787-7b86ecf0d920_0_ hostport 443 */ tcp to:10.42.0.7:443

Chain KUBE-HP-VG7GIYRPKPR5JDKH (1 references)
target     prot opt source               destination         
KUBE-MARK-MASQ  all  --  10.42.0.7            anywhere             /* k8s_router-default-68d4dc8676-n2fz8_openshift-ingress_72872086-65d9-47e6-a787-7b86ecf0d920_0_ hostport 80 */
DNAT       tcp  --  anywhere             anywhere             /* k8s_router-default-68d4dc8676-n2fz8_openshift-ingress_72872086-65d9-47e6-a787-7b86ecf0d920_0_ hostport 80 */ tcp to:10.42.0.7:80
...

# oc get pod -n openshift-ingress -o wide
NAME                              READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE   IP          NODE             NOMINATED NODE   READINESS GATES
router-default-68d4dc8676-n2fz8   1/1     Running   0          87m   10.42.0.7   microshift-dev   <none>           <none>
```
The iptables rules will forward 80 and 443 traffic to the pod IP directly. But there is one more implication with using `hostPort` directives:
```bash
# netstat -ptanu | grep -E ":(80|443)"
tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:80              0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN      1105/crio           
tcp        0      0 0.0.0.0:443             0.0.0.0:*               LISTEN      1105/crio 
```
Crio is listening in all of the interfaces for any 80/443 traffic too. This means that from the host itself you can reach the router in those ports as well. Trying to connect to any IP in the host works, but there is this nft rule:
```bash
	chain KUBE-FIREWALL {
		ip saddr != 127.0.0.0/8 ip daddr 127.0.0.0/8  ct status dnat counter packets 0 bytes 0 drop
	}
```
Which will drop all attempts to connect to the router from the host.
```bash
# curl -I 192.168.122.254
HTTP/1.0 503 Service Unavailable
pragma: no-cache
cache-control: private, max-age=0, no-cache, no-store
content-type: text/html

[root@microshift-dev microshift]# curl -I 10.43.0.1
^C
[root@microshift-dev microshift]# curl -I 10.44.0.0
HTTP/1.0 503 Service Unavailable
pragma: no-cache
cache-control: private, max-age=0, no-cache, no-store
content-type: text/html

[root@microshift-dev microshift]# curl -I 10.42.0.7
HTTP/1.0 503 Service Unavailable
pragma: no-cache
cache-control: private, max-age=0, no-cache, no-store
content-type: text/html

[root@microshift-dev microshift]# curl -I 127.0.0.1 -m 1
curl: (28) Connection timed out after 1001 milliseconds

[root@microshift-dev microshift]# curl -I 127.0.0.1 -m 5
curl: (28) Connection timed out after 5001 milliseconds
```

From within the router pod everything works:
```bash
# oc exec -it -n openshift-ingress router-default-68d4dc8676-n2fz8 -- curl -I localhost
HTTP/1.0 503 Service Unavailable
pragma: no-cache
cache-control: private, max-age=0, no-cache, no-store
content-type: text/html
```

So maybe I confused you with which localhost I was referring to.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the detailed explanation!  Maybe it's a question of semantics.  In my mind, the router "listens on loopback" in the sense that it is binding a socket that listens on all interfaces, including lo.  You're saying that any traffic to 127/8 gets dropped by the firewall, which has the same effect as if the router weren't listening on lo, right?  So it doesn't really matter...  Although now I wonder whether there could be surprises in the future if IPv6 were enabled and the firewall blocks 127/8 but not ::1.

Author: > You're saying that any traffic to 127/8 gets dropped by the firewall, which has the same effect as if the router weren't listening on lo, right?

Yeah, exazctly. Actually the way it is setup now it does listen on lo, but nft steals the packets before they reach it.

> Although now I wonder whether there could be surprises in the future if IPv6 were enabled and the firewall blocks 127/8 but not ::1.

Right now we do not have support for IPv6, but this is one of the things that we need to look into.

addresses from ovnk, such as `169.254.169.2`, which is the link local IP
address that ovnk uses in `br-ex` for internal handling of flows.

The approach described in this enhancement does not expose the router in such
IP, as it introduces conflicts between iptables rules and openflow.

## Version Skew Strategy
N/A

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions

### Failure Modes
If the configured entries in `ingress.expose.ipAddresses` and
`ingress.expose.interfaces` do not exist in the node, MicroShift should fail

> to start.

Reviewer 2: Can I set `status` to "Disabled" and still specify `ports` or `expose`?

What happens in case of a DNS lookup failure?

What happens if I specify a port that is already in use?

Reviewer 2: I'm curious whether MicroShift will refuse to start if I put an invalid IP address, NIC, or whatever _and_ set `status` to "Disabled".  I suppose it isn't necessary to go into detail about that case here though.

Reviewer: It would be good to be clear about the precedence. If the status is disabled, I would expect everything else to be ignored.

Author: Done.

* Allow users to allow traffic from specific IP addresses.
* Allow users to deny traffic to the router.
* Internal access from applications to the router must remain unchanged when
  the router is enabled.

### Non-Goals
N/A

## Proposal
Each configuration option will get its own section with specifics and
details.
As a common baseline, a new top level section will be added to the
configuration:
```yaml
apiServer:
   ...
# new from here.
ingress:
  status: <Managed|Removed> # Defaults to Managed.
  ports:
    http: <int> # Defaults to 80.
    https: <int> # Defaults to 443.
  expose: # Defaults to IPs in the host. Details below.
    - <NIC name|IP address>
    - ...
```

### Enable/disable the router
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
ingress:
  status: <Managed|Removed> # Defaults to Managed.
```

With this option MicroShift will decide whether it should create the router
upon starting. This includes not just the pod, but all the associated resources
that come along with it: namespace, services, configmaps, etc.

When setting the option to `Removed`, the next MicroShift restart will
delete all the default router related resources. Note that any existing routes

> will stop being served and it will require an application deploying an

Reviewer 7: This includes existing component routes such as console and auth.  I'm not sure what other options MicroShift offers to replace console and auth, but if the default components need to continue working, it can't delete all the default router related resources.

It will also get rid of some built-in DNS configuration and management and future Gateway API functionality.

Author: MicroShift does not have console/auth capabilities. The only APIs from openshift are routes and SCCs. One of the requirements for the feature is to disable the router so that it does not take any resources, we need to remove it to fulfill it (this removes the `openshift-ingress` namespace plus cluster roles and cluster role bindings).

OpenShift router instance.

Setting the option to `Managed` will deploy the router, while `Removed` will
disable it. Default will be `Managed`.

The choice of `Managed` and `Removed` is intentional and ressembles that of
[OpenShift for operators](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/4caef7fe3d0f78f3f3c26b5159f77bdbd00b9c2f/operator/v1/types.go#L33-L50).
In MicroShift, however, `Managed`` does not have the exact same meaning, as
the management of the resources happens only when MicroShift starts. Any

> changes made to the router will get reverted on the next restart.

Reviewer 7: Do you mean:
```suggestion
changes made to the router outside of the new ingress configuration will get reverted on the next restart.
```

Author: Yes, clarified.

### Allow specific IP addresses
This may be seen as a special case of firewalling, but using IP addresses
instead of ports. Using the same `NetworkPolicy` resources, IPs may be
specified to allow traffic from them and reject it from any other source.

Please note this is a manual procedure for the user. Documentation will be
added on how to perform the required actions.

More information in the design details section.

### Workflow Description
**cluster admin** is a human user responsible for configuring a MicroShift
cluster.

1. The cluster admin adds specific configuration for the router prior to
   MicroShift's start.
2. After MicroShift started, the system will ingest the configuration and setup
   everything according to it.
3. The router will be enabled/disabled, be exposed on the specified ports,
   listen on the specified IPs, and allow connections from only specified the
   IP addresses, all according to the cluster admin-provided configuration.
   This is reflected in the status in the LoadBalancer-type service for the
   router (if the router is enabled).

### API Extensions
As described in the proposal, there is an entire new section in the configuration:
```yaml

> ingress:

Reviewer 7: Which MicroShift API object is this?

Author: This is MicroShift's start configuration.

Reviewer 7: Ah, ok.  Is it an object in openshift/api ? That's usually what `API Extensions` refers to in the proposal.

Author: Ah I see. In this case MicroShift is a bit different. This is the [spec](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/cmd/generate-config/config/config-openapi-spec.json) for the configuration, but its not present anywhere else in OCP.

  - Ingress
```
Assuming the pod network is configured to use CIDR `10.42.0.0/16`, the above
policy will block all traffic not coming from that network.

Any of these methods is equivalent to using firewalld to block traffic, but
using the CNI instead of a host level setting. This provides greater
flexibility, as it is self contained within MicroShift APIs.

If a user needs to block traffic to a port this needs a `NetworkPolicy`
resource like the one shown above. This is NOT automatically done by
MicroShift, user action is required.

#### Exposing the router
Relying on [LoadBalancer controller enhancement](loadbalancer-service-support.md)
means the services are updated by this component. However, ovnk only turns IP
addresses into iptables rules, it does not take Hostname, which is another
valid field for the service status.

Since the configuration uses NIC names the [service controller](loadbalancer-service-support.md)
needs to translate them to their corresponding IP addresses, and then
configure them in the service.

Since the NIC names are present in the host, MicroShift will need to list he IP
addresses from them and include them in the service `status` field. Due to the

> changing nature of IP addresses, MicroShift will periodically check the listed

Reviewer 7: If possible, I suggest designing a watcher for this, instead of a "periodic check".

Author: Done.

# new from here.
ingress:
  status: <Managed|Removed> # Defaults to Managed.
  ports:
    http: <int> # Defaults to 80.
    https: <int> # Defaults to 443.
  expose: # Defaults to IPs in the host. Details below.
    - <NIC name|IP address>
    - ...
```

### Enable/disable the router
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
ingress:
  status: <Managed|Removed> # Defaults to Managed.
```

With this option MicroShift will decide whether it should create the router
upon starting. This includes not just the pod, but all the associated resources
that come along with it: namespace, services, configmaps, etc.

When setting the option to `Removed`, the next MicroShift restart will
delete all the default router related resources. Note that any existing routes
will stop being served and it will require an application deploying an
OpenShift router instance.

Setting the option to `Managed` will deploy the router, while `Removed` will
disable it. Default will be `Managed`.

The choice of `Managed` and `Removed` is intentional and ressembles that of
[OpenShift for operators](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/4caef7fe3d0f78f3f3c26b5159f77bdbd00b9c2f/operator/v1/types.go#L33-L50).

> In MicroShift, however, `Managed`` does not have the exact same meaning, as

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In MicroShift, however, `Managed` does not have the exact same meaning, as
```

Author: Done

### Configure IPs where the router listens
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
ingress:
  expose: # Defaults to IPs in the host. Details below.
    - <NIC name|IP address>
    - ...
```

As described in [this section](#using-loadbalancer-service-type), the use of
`LoadBalancer` makes ovnk configure iptables rules to expose the service
outside of the cluster.
Building on [LoadBalancer controller enhancement](loadbalancer-service-support.md),
the service is exposed using the node IP and configured ports.

All the IPs where the router is exposed need to be part of the `LoadBalancer`
service status definition. In order to simplify configuration the router will
allow specifying only IP addresses and interface names.

MicroShift will default to listen to external IPs, the service IP and the
apiserver IP, as this was the previous behavior and it needs to keep it for
compatibility. Any advanced configuration, such as multiple interfaces, VLANs,
etc. will need user's configuration. Any user's configuration will override all
of the defaults.

If the configuration includes duplicates in the form of same entries in the

> same list or referring to the same IP in different ways (hostnames or NICs),

Reviewer 2: Here and a couple other places, you still mention hostnames even though you removed the option to specify hostnames in a recent change.

Author: Done

1. The cluster admin adds specific configuration for the router prior to
   MicroShift's start.
2. After MicroShift started, the system will ingest the configuration and setup
   everything according to it.
3. The router will be enabled/disabled, be exposed on the specified ports,
   listen on the specified IPs, and allow connections from only specified the
   IP addresses, all according to the cluster admin-provided configuration.
   This is reflected in the status in the LoadBalancer-type service for the
   router (if the router is enabled).

### API Extensions
As described in the proposal, there is an entire new section in the configuration:
```yaml
ingress:
  status: <Managed|Removed> # Defaults to Managed.
  ports:
    http: <int> # Defaults to 80.
    https: <int> # Defaults to 443.
  expose: # Defaults to IPs in the host. Details below.
    - <NIC name|IP address>
    - ...
```

For more information check each individual section.

### Topology Considerations
#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes
N/A

#### Standalone Clusters
N/A

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift
Enhancement is solely intended for MicroShift.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> The default router is composed of a bunch of assets part of the MicroShift

Reviewer 2: I think you are missing a word or phrase here.  
```suggestion
The default router is composed of a bunch of assets that are embedded as part of the MicroShift
```

Author: Done

        cidr: 10.42.0.0/16
  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/deployment-ingresscontroller: default
  policyTypes:
  - Ingress
```
Assuming the pod network is configured to use CIDR `10.42.0.0/16`, the above
policy will block all traffic not coming from that network.

Any of these methods is equivalent to using firewalld to block traffic, but
using the CNI instead of a host level setting. This provides greater
flexibility, as it is self contained within MicroShift APIs.

If a user needs to block traffic to a port this needs a `NetworkPolicy`
resource like the one shown above. This is NOT automatically done by
MicroShift, user action is required.

#### Exposing the router
Relying on [LoadBalancer controller enhancement](loadbalancer-service-support.md)
means the services are updated by this component. However, ovnk only turns IP
addresses into iptables rules, it does not take Hostname, which is another
valid field for the service status.

Since the configuration uses NIC names the [service controller](loadbalancer-service-support.md)
needs to translate them to their corresponding IP addresses, and then
configure them in the service.

> Since the NIC names are present in the host, MicroShift will need to list he IP
> addresses from them and include them in the service `status` field. Due to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the NIC names are present in the host, MicroShift will need to list the NIC's IP
addresses and include them in the service `status` field. Due to the
```

Author: Done

> changing nature of IP addresses, MicroShift will start a watcher for the listed

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what a "watcher" is in this context.  Is that a Netlink concept?

Author: Not really, this is about watching the NICs IP addresses in case they change. MicroShift is already watching for node IP changes, so this is an addition in the same fashion.

This setting is also the default in OCP when deploying in cloud, having a load
balancer before the cluster. Manifests for both OCP and MicroShift are
compatible in this regard.

## Open Questions
N/A

## Test Plan
All of the changes listed here will be included in the current e2e scenario
testing harness in MicroShift.

## Graduation Criteria
Targeting GA for MicroShift 4.16 release.

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
- Ability to utilize the enhancement end to end
- End user documentation, relative API stability
- Sufficient test coverage

### Tech Preview -> GA
- More testing (upgrade, downgrade)
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default
- User facing documentation created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

### Removing a deprecated feature
N/A

## Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy
In the previous implementation, using host ports, the router would listen on
any interface (except loopback). This included some of the internal IP
addresses from ovnk, such as `169.254.169.2`, which is the link local IP
address that ovnk uses in `br-ex` for internal handling of flows.

The approach described in this enhancement does not expose the router in such

> IP, as it introduces conflicts between iptables rules and openflow.

Reviewer 2: Maybe helpful to call out the firewalld issue here.  If I understand correctly, the cluster admin will need to do a manual migration by translating any custom firewalld rules into networkpolicy—right?

Author: Context for this section is a bit different. In current implementation the router is exposed in all of the interfaces, but not all of them work because of networking details. Link local address conflicts with some ovnk rules that take it into an endless loop of NATing, for example.
As for firewalld, in current implementation we do not have firewalld rules applying to the router, as hostPort rules take precedence over firewall. Since this approach is also outside of k8s control, network policies dont apply either. With this approach the firewall part is the same, but you can use network policies. This is a new capability that MicroShift didnt have before.

Reviewer 2: Ah, when reading the "Firewalling ports" section, I thought the implication was that firewalld was the currently supported means of restricting access.  However, the "Why LoadBalancer service" section does that "the current setup" (i.e. without this enhancement) uses host ports, which prevents the use of firewalld to restrict access.  Thanks for clarifying!

## Graduation Criteria
Targeting GA for MicroShift 4.16 release.

### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview
- Ability to utilize the enhancement end to end
- End user documentation, relative API stability
- Sufficient test coverage

### Tech Preview -> GA
- More testing (upgrade, downgrade)
- Sufficient time for feedback
- Available by default
- User facing documentation created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

### Removing a deprecated feature
N/A

## Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy
In the previous implementation, using host ports, the router would listen on
any interface (except loopback). This included some of the internal IP
addresses from ovnk, such as `169.254.169.2`, which is the link local IP
address that ovnk uses in `br-ex` for internal handling of flows.

The approach described in this enhancement does not expose the router in such
IP, as it introduces conflicts between iptables rules and openflow.

## Version Skew Strategy
N/A

## Operational Aspects of API Extensions

### Failure Modes
* If the configured entries in `ingress.expose.ipAddresses` and
  `ingress.expose.interfaces` do not exist in the node, MicroShift should fail

>   to start.

Reviewer: If there are several listed, and at least 1 exists, will MicroShift still stop?

---
title: microshift-router-configuration
authors:
  - "@pacevedom"
reviewers:
  - "@eslutsky"
  - "@copejon"
  - "@ggiguash"
  - "@pmtk"

>   - "@pliurh"

Author: Done

approvers:
  - "@dhellmann"

>   - "@jerpeter1"

Author: Done

disable the router or change its listening ports.

In order to allow these operations and many more, a set of configuration options
is proposed.

## Motivation
MicroShift's default ingress router comes as part of the product and is always
deployed. As part of the start procedure, MicroShift will configure the router
with fixed parameters, such as being always enabled, and tied to ports 80 and
443. None of these are configurable for the user, and they also tie to how the
router is exposed in the cluster.

In order to allow more flexibility, the following configuration parameters shall
be added:
- Enable/Disable. Some use cases may be egress only, meaning they do not need
  an ingress controller. In this case the router pod should not be scheduled
  to save resources. There should be no rules associated to firewalld or
  iptables either for an improved security posture.
- Listening ports. Allow configuring ports other than 80 and 443 improves
  flexibility.
- Which IPs the router listens on. Some use cases may require the router to be
  reachable only from certain networks.

### User Stories
As a MicroShift user, I want to enable/disable the default router.

> As a MicroShift user, I want to disable the default router.

Author: Rephrased, it was more of a typo.

> As a MicroShift user, I want to be able to configure in which ports the default

Author: Done

router is listening.

As a MicroShift user, I want to be able to choose the IPs where the router is
listening.

As a MicroShift user, I want to be able to allow traffic to the router from

> specific IP addresses.

Author: The listening IP is handled through iptables rules, but the restricted list of IPs (if any) that are allowed to hit the router service can be controlled by NetworkPolicy resources.

> specific IP addresses.

Reviewer: OK, we talked offline about not including user-driven processes based on existing APIs in this design doc. We will document those elsewhere.

As a MicroShift user, I want to be able to deny traffic to the router from

> specific IP addresses.

Author: Will remove this, as the proposal uses a policy to allow, not deny.

### Goals
* Allow users to enable the router.
* Allow users to disable the router.
* Allow users to reach the router in the configured ports.
* Allow users to configure in which IPs the router listens.
* Allow users to allow traffic from specific IP addresses.
* Allow users to deny traffic from specific IP addresses.

### Non-Goals
* N/A

> ## Proposal

Reviewer: This section is very long, and seems to mix background information and the proposed changes. See if you can summarize the proposal here and move the longer description below to the "Design Details" section.

Each configuration option will get its own subsection with specifics and
details.
As a common baseline, a new top level section will be added to the
configuration:
```yaml
apiServer:
   ...
# new from here.
router:
  enable: <true|false> # Defaults to true.
  policy:
    ports:
      http:
        enabled: <true|false> # Defaults to false.
        port: <int> # Defaults to 80.
      https:
        enabled: <true|false> # Defaults to true.
        port: <int> # Defaults to 443.
    expose:
      - <IP address/NIC> # Defaults to the NICs of the node
    allow:

>       - <IP address> # Defaults to empty.

Author: Not really close, as the OCP configuration seems intended for wider purposes: https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/master/operator/v1/types_ingress.go

>       - <IP address> # Defaults to empty.

Author: There is only one config option that would be the same, and that belongs to the other router feature about the namespace ownership. That one is coming in a different enhancement.

>       - <IP address> # Defaults to empty.

Reviewer: So in OpenShift it is not possible to control the ports or IPs the router listens on? I suppose that's all dealt with through the external load balancer instead?

>       - <IP address> # Defaults to empty.

Reviewer 2: OpenShift has options to configure the listening ports but not IP addresses: https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/4caef7fe3d0f78f3f3c26b5159f77bdbd00b9c2f/operator/v1/types_ingress.go#L672-L713

```

### Enable/disable the router
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
router:
  enable: <true|false> # Defaults to true.

> ```

Author: Will turn into an enum.

With this option MicroShift will decide whether it should create the router
upon starting. This includes not just the pod, but all the associated resources
that come along with it: namespace, services, configmaps, etc.

When setting the option to `false`, the next MicroShift restart should delete
all the router resources, if any were created before and relate to the router

> deployment, but not the RBAC resources.

Author: We should still allow route API resources, which involves RBAC. This proposal is about removing the default router, but not the whole API.

There might be use cases where you would need to run the router under specific parameters/conditions, which may be different from the default router. This would require having the API, controllers, RBAC, etc.

> deployment, but not the RBAC resources.

Reviewer: For now let's assume it's all or nothing. We can list as a risk that there would be rework in the future if someone wanted to disable the default router and configure a custom router. We can deal with that if the feature request comes up.

> deployment, but not the RBAC resources.

Author: That sounds reasonable and is also easier to do. It is included now.

Setting the option to `true` will deploy the router, while `false` will disable
it. Default will be `true`.

### Listening ports
The following configuration is proposed:
```yaml
router:
  policy:
    ports:
      http:
        enabled: <true|false> # Defaults to false.
        port: <int> # Defaults to 80.
      https:
        enabled: <true|false> # Defaults to true.
        port: <int> # Defaults to 443.
```
For improved security and flexibility, exposed ports may be enabled or
disabled, and configuring the http/https port too.

In the current implementation both ports are fixed and can not be configured.
Back when there was no support for LoadBalancer service types, router was
forced to use a different way of getting exposed. Using ports 80 and 443 meant
that NodePort service types can not be used. Using host network would also
bind port 1936 to the host, which is used for internal metrics. The only option
that was left was using host ports.

> #### Host ports

Author: Moved it to the design details.

> #### Host ports

Author: Reworked it.

target     prot opt source               destination         
KUBE-MARK-MASQ  all  --  10.42.0.10           anywhere             /* k8s_router-default-5db99c7c74-smtk6_openshift-ingress_e790c540-cc74-4b5b-8759-5048455e3406_0_ hostport 443 */
DNAT       tcp  --  anywhere             anywhere             /* k8s_router-default-5db99c7c74-smtk6_openshift-ingress_e790c540-cc74-4b5b-8759-5048455e3406_0_ hostport 443 */ tcp to:10.42.0.10:443
```

The IP shown in the iptables rules belongs to the pod itself. This means all
external traffic will be forwarded straight to crio and forwarded to the
container afterwards.

The following limitations apply to the current setup:
* The iptables rules bypass firewalld settings. This means any firewall
  configuration applying to host ports will be ignored. It is not possible
  to limit external traffic to these ports.
* NetworkPolicy resources do not apply to host ports. These resources are
  able to control which traffic reaches which endpoints, including external
  sources.
* Any pod using this option is unable to scale within the same node.
* Port numbers are bound to the deployment, therefore any changes require
  a restart of the pod.

> #### Using LoadBalancer service type

Author: Moved to design details.

> #### Using LoadBalancer service type

Author: Reworked it.

network policy will do:
```yaml
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: NetworkPolicy
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2023-10-30T11:51:35Z"
  generation: 1
  name: block-router
  namespace: openshift-ingress
  resourceVersion: "228099"
  uid: ae86d503-af73-417a-ac1c-073325344322
spec:
  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/deployment-ingresscontroller: default
  policyTypes:
  - Ingress
```

Or explicitly allowing certain ports, blocking the rest:
```yaml
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: NetworkPolicy
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2023-10-30T13:48:58Z"
  generation: 1
  name: block-router
  namespace: openshift-ingress
  resourceVersion: "1891"
  uid: 93c893d8-9e57-4e9f-9bc7-2eac4eb054f6
spec:
  ingress:
  - ports:
    - port: 443
      protocol: TCP
  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      ingresscontroller.operator.openshift.io/deployment-ingresscontroller: default
  policyTypes:
  - Ingress
```
This policy will only allow traffic enter through port 443, while blocking 80.

Any of these methods is equivalent to using firewalld to block traffic, but
using the CNI instead of a host level setting. This provides greater

> flexibility, as it is self contained within MicroShift.

Reviewer: Are we considering automatically generating these policies based on configuration settings?

Author: Yes, that is the idea. Will add more details in the design details section.

Reviewer: Why wouldn't we just tell users to set up their own policies?

Reviewer: Based on our conversation earlier, I think we can focus in this enhancement on the configuration options needed to let the user control where the router listens. We can document the use of the NetworkPolicy API to control access to that endpoint separately, since there's no code change needed for that.

DNAT       tcp  --  anywhere             microshift-dev       tcp dpt:http to:10.43.98.31:80
```
Traffic towards the router will be DNATted to the node ip, and then reach the
service. All services default to use `externalTrafficPolicy: Cluster`, which
will SNAT the client source IP to match that one of the node. This will get
further NATing as described [here](https://github.com/openshift/microshift/blob/main/docs/contributor/network/ovn_kubernetes_traffic_flows.md#host-to-clusterservice).
By the time the traffic reaches the NetworkPolicy checks the source IP has
been replaced with `100.64.0.0/16`, which will not produce a match and traffic
will get rejected.

To overcome this, all LoadBalancer services in MicroShift that are subject to
get NetworkPolicy resources to control external traffic must set
`externalTrafficPolicy: Local`. This setting will not SNAT packets and the
source IP is preserved until NetworkPolicy checks run.

This setting, however, comes at the expense an even load when having more than
one node, as traffic will not be sent to another node on the same port. This
is not an issue in single node, which is MicroShift's use case and design

> principle.

Reviewer: Does this mean that workloads would have to be configured differently to run on MicroShift and OpenShift?

Author: Only LoadBalancer services, doesnt matter who created them. If you want to be able to use ingress NetworkPolicy, you need that setting. This might be a narrow use case, but still.

Reviewer: One of the fundamental promises we make is that a user could craft a set of manifests that would work on both MicroShift and OpenShift. We have to retain that ability as we do this new work.

It's not clear to me from your answer if we will be able to do that, but the way a workload would need to be configured would change. Can you clarify that?

Reviewer: OK, please capture that detail in the text of the enhancement so we can close this thread.

Author: Done

### Workflow Description
**cluster admin** is a human user responsible for configuring a MicroShift
cluster.

1. The cluster admin adds specific configuration for the router prior to
   MicroShift's start.
2. After MicroShift started, the system will ingest the configuration and setup
   everything according to it.
3. The router will enabled/disabled, be exposed on the specified ports, on the
   specified IPs, allowing only specified IP addresses, all according to the
   cluster admin provided configuration. This includes the status in the
   LoadBalancer service type for the router.

### API Extensions
None

### Implementation Details
The default router is composed of a bunch of assets part of the MicroShift
binary. These assets come from the rebase, copied from the original router in
[cluster-ingress-operator](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator).
There is already a [LoadBalancer service](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/master/pkg/manifests/assets/router/service-cloud.yaml)
included, which MicroShift does not copy yet. Depending on the options
configured in MicroShift, this resource will need further customization done

> by MicroShift's start process.

Reviewer: It would be good to have more info here about how the configuration options map to settings in the various manifests.

Author: Described how each configuration option changes manifests

The rest of the changes imply only additions. The LoadBalancer controller needs
an expansion on its capabilities to include more IPs in the status and log any
changes to services. All the logic to control NetworkPolicy resources is also
new.

### Risks and Mitigations
Some of the features in this enhancement proposal rely on the LoadBalancer

> controller.

Author: Yes, will clarify.

Some of the features rely on NetworkPolicy resources, so the CNI needs
to support that.

### Drawbacks
Some of the features depend on a non-agnostic CNI design, which is the
LoadBalancer controller. A different behavior should be expected if using a
different CNI.

## Design Details
### Open Questions

> * Do we want to have defaults for listening ports, or dont open them if there

Reviewer: If we do not have any ports open by default, upgrades would require configuration changes, right?

What does OpenShift set as the defaults?

Reviewer: We need the default behavior after the work for this enhancement to match the default behavior of MicroShift today so that a user upgrading MicroShift does not also have to deploy a new configuration file to retain the behavior they're expecting.

  is no value configured? Port 80 is typically closed for security reasons.

### Test Plan
N/A

### Graduation Criteria
Targeting GA for MicroShift 4.16 release.

> #### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

Reviewer: These transition sections all have details in the template that should be retained in this document.

Author: Done
